Hello Steve, how are you? Do you want more time because I've got all I'm in no hurry.
No, no it's fine. The university just called an all-starved meeting about some finance
stuff which I didn't have in my diary when we organised this but to be honest I only
have a bowl of soup for lunch. That's all sorted out.
Do you know that the link you sent me? Oh yes, yeah. I don't know if that was written for an
academic audience but I found it really accessible. I mean that was the first book that I ever wrote.
Oh really? I've never written in a jargon written way. I think it is a fair criticism of my work
that it's not the most theoretically incisive research. I don't do that kind of stuff.
I think that because pretty much all the work that I do is related to the landscape
that is kind of all around us so I think it's easy to write in a way and about things that
people can relate to rather than stuff that's buried in the ground or shards of pottery that
we dig up and get terribly excited by and so on. That is actually all a bit more abstract.
Yes, because it doesn't look like a pot does it?
Absolutely.
Whereas if you're talking about the names of settlements or why fields of a particular
shape, anyone who lives in the countryside can think oh god yeah I can understand that now.
So I think I do work that is easier to communicate to people than lots of my colleagues who might
do more scientific research.
Yeah, yeah. Where did you get them all from? Sorry I'm going off on the tangent now.
This is the book titled The Gwent Levels.
Yes, let me just check. The one you sent me.
Is now freely available online.
I'm just yeah the um sorry Steve you've lost my faith but it is yeah The Gwent Levels,
the evolution of a wetland landscape.
Well that the history of that book I mean you I mean you will have heard talk of a gentleman
called Rick Turner.
Yes, yes.
Sadly died um um well Rick was he used to work for Caddo.
Yeah.
And he in the early 1990s he recognized that the Gwent Levels were threatened with development
and in particular the proposed diversion of the M4 south of people.
Yeah.
Now I back then I was a research student at Reading and I was doing my thesis on the reclamation
of the wetlands all around the southern estuary.
Why were you doing that? Why did you choose that?
Um the reason well looking back it's slightly odd that my undergraduate dissertation supervisor
was working with another colleague up in Gloucestershire.
Yeah.
Of the history of the reclamation so sort of the areas that Rose is more familiar with.
Okay.
He just thought it would be interesting to have somebody look at Somerset and um
The Gwent Levels.
Okay.
I wanted to do a PhD and so he sort of gently encouraged me to do that.
Yeah.
Um I started giving odd papers at conferences that Rick went to so he heard about my work.
Um in a way what I was doing was exactly what he wanted anyway um and I still remember we were
at a conference at you know St Fagans.
Yes yeah yeah.
And um after after we had a conference and then we would some of us were just wandering
around the outdoorsy bits and Rick sidled up to me.
Can I have a chat sort of thing.
What are you planning on doing after your PhD?
Um because he wanted a commission.
Yeah.
The Gwent Levels Historic Landscape Study.
Now of course for me I mean this was like somebody was offering me two years work.
And Rick jointly funded that with what was then called the Countryside Council for Wales.
Okay.
CCW.
Yeah.
That is now it's morphed into Natural Resources Wales.
Okay yeah.
So they they they funded it 50 50.
Yeah yeah.
But it was only part way through the project that I realised that it was partly funded because of
this threat of the M4 proposed M4 diversion.
Yeah yeah.
Um and I haven't I haven't got this in writing.
I'd love to have this in writing but one of the early highlights of my career was I gave a paper
on my work to a group at the Welsh Office Highways.
Yes.
And um once again this bloke came up to me afterwards and sort of said oh Dr Rippon very
nice to meet you you know very interested in your work.
Do you realise that you've moved a motorway?
And he went on to explain that the work that I did was instrumental in shifting the original
proposed line of the motorway was to go right through the middle of Whitsun Goldcliff Nash.
Really?
Yeah.
Right.
So a very a route that went quite close to the coast.
Yeah.
And it was because I managed to sort of make the case for the the importance of this landscape.
That they moved it to the northern route.
Wow.
Essentially along the southern side of the old steelworks.
How phenomenal.
So I know that I of course now the motorway is not going to be built anyway but um I haven't
got it in writing but it's there.
That doesn't matter.
It further confirms it as well.
What was Rick Turner like then?
Steve sorry I'm recording this is that okay because I'm going to transcribe it and I'll
send it to you afterwards but what was um Rick Turner like?
I mean he I mean he was lovely he um he was one of these people that's was quite quiet
doesn't necessarily doesn't sprout off and so on um no ego or anything like that just quietly
gets on with things and he was an absolute pleasure to work with um I mean he had a long
standing interest in wetlands.
Why?
He used to be the archaeologist at Cheshire County Council I think it was but he was an
archaeologist in Cheshire when um some gentlemen who were cutting peat found a preserved body
and it was the body was called Lindow Man.
Oh yes.
And it's the best preserved what's called bog body.
Yeah.
And Rick was the first archaeologist kind of like on call who went out to see it.
And he sort of oversaw that project.
Then he got a job as an inspector of ancient monuments at Caddo.
Yeah.
But because of his particular interest in wetlands he was kind of given the seven estuary
as part of his job description as sort of like Caddo's man on the levels as it were.
Yeah.
So yeah I mean he was sort of knowledgeable about wetlands he absolutely saw the value of them.
And I think sort of without making it obvious I think he must have known that it was the first
time I'd had a proper job.
And I know I didn't really I think when you're that young you possibly
don't get worried about stuff as perhaps you do a little bit as you get older.
That's true.
Yeah.
But he certainly helped guide me through some of the things or for some of the meetings needing
to produce certain sorts of documents and so on and so forth.
He gently guided and sort of supported me and so.
Yeah.
What remit did he give you then?
Sorry?
What remit did he give you?
It was agreed that I had to produce two reports.
Yeah.
One was going to be the published book which you've read and the other one which I know
has been used a lot within planning departments and so on and so forth.
It was never formally published.
It had a very limited print run.
Okay.
And that gave like a little description of each character area on the levels.
If you think sort of the area around Nash and Goldcliff,
if you look at a map there's little settlements dotted about.
Yeah.
The fields quite small and fiddly.
I mean that's quite an old sort of medieval landscape.
That's one character area.
Okay.
And then you've got, if you go further inland,
sort of south of the Hanwen still works, you've got areas of long straight roads.
Yes.
Very rectilinear fields.
Yeah.
There's all no settlements actually.
And it's the latest area to have been drained and reclaimed.
It was farmed by farmers who lived elsewhere
because those parts of the levels would have been too wet to live in.
So that's a different character area.
Yeah.
What this second report did was divide the levels up into sort of these character areas
and write about them in turn.
So it's very much a companion volume to the one that you've read.
You've read the one that gives the big chronological, if you like, narrative.
Yeah.
The other really provided a lot of the detail about each area.
And is that available anywhere?
I don't think it is.
Really?
No. I mean there were hundreds of copies printed.
Yeah.
But I know, I think they were all sort of snapped up really quite quickly.
I think I've got two copies left, one at home and one in the office at work.
Yeah.
It's the sort of thing now that would look terribly dated because of course it was done
on my little Mac computer rather than proper desktop publishing and so forth.
Nowadays, of course, something like that would at least be made freely available as a PDF.
Yeah.
But when the project started in 1993, there was no email.
So hard to think of.
I don't know if I had a mobile.
I don't think I did back then.
So it was a very, very different world.
That was my remit was to produce those two reports.
But I say I know through talking to Rick that by the end of the project, I was aware
that actually the big remit was to produce a report that would try and move this road
and stop this road from going right through the middle of the levels.
Off the record, you did.
Which I did until they decided not to build it at all.
Yes.
Steve, I've got some questions but I might,
but I wonder if you could just start.
This might seem a bit basic to me.
If you can just introduce yourself and your specialism and
your involvement with the grant levels and with the levels project.
The living levels project.
Living levels project, yeah.
Well, as I say, I am a professor of landscape archaeology at the University of Exeter.
And my interest in the wetlands around the Severn Estuary goes back to my PhD.
That was a study of both sides of the estuary and it looked at the changing ways that human
communities exploited the rich natural resources of these wetlands.
And then gradually started to intensify how they used the wetlands.
Rather than just hunting and fishing, they started grazing their livestock,
in banking the land, using it for arable farming and so on.
And I looked at that over the Roman and the medieval periods.
Then I got the job doing the grant levels historic landscape study that we talked about.
That was from 1993 to 1995.
Then I got a government funded fellowship to do a comparison of wetland use all the way around
Britain and North West Europe.
And then I got the lectureship at the University of Exeter.
Oh wow.
Ever since.
Okay.
And I think, I mean, what I try to do in my work is to sort of cross boundaries.
So I love using archaeological evidence, maps, written documents that I can access.
I can't read medieval Latin or anything.
But I can read sort of 17th century handwriting onwards and so on.
So I love looking at some of the old documents interpreting place names and so on.
Yeah.
So I try to be very interdisciplinary.
Is that unusual?
Sorry?
It's not unusual for a relatively small group that would call themselves landscape archaeologists.
Yeah.
It is to my eternal frustration, and don't write this down,
but too many archaeologists and too many historians, for example, will only study one thing.
Yeah.
No, they will do is study place names.
Or all they will study is pottery.
Yeah.
Or they're only really interested in burial sites, not the wider landscape.
All they do is study burials and so on.
And then you miss context then, don't you?
You lose context.
Yeah.
What's often said about landscape archaeology is that you're a jack of all trades and a master of none.
And that is true.
There are people out there that know a darn sight more about place names than I do.
Yeah.
But I know a darn sight more about landscapes than place names experts do.
So to the uninitiated, what is a landscape historian?
Well, I mean, you can use it in two senses.
Well, landscape archaeologists, sorry.
All right, yeah.
I mean, in a sense, I would say a landscape archaeologist is a landscape historian.
In the sense of somebody who's trying to write the story of a landscape.
Yeah.
But the normal meaning of landscape history is only to study documents.
Okay.
What distinguishes archaeology is that you study physical remains.
Yeah.
So archaeology is studying the past through its material remains.
Those would be things that you dig from beneath the ground.
Yeah.
Right the way through to what I tend to focus in on, what we would call the historic landscape.
Which is the present day patterns of fields and roads and settlements and land uses
that although they're in use today, can be 100 years old,
a thousand years old, or they can be 2000 years old.
So they're above ground.
Above ground.
Yeah.
So on the Gwent levels, quite a lot of those rings and the field boundary ditches
are medieval in date.
So they probably are about 800 years old.
Mm-hmm.
If you go to the far west of Cornwall, have you ever been on holiday to Pennsance or St Ives?
I am walking there this summer actually on the coastal path.
Well, well if you do the coastal path around West Penn with.
Yeah.
Okay. Pass Lands End.
If you do that stretch.
Yeah.
In places you will be walking through field systems, field boundaries.
That are at least 2000 years old.
Why, really?
So what should one be looking for?
This is where if we were meeting face to face, I could draw you a sketch.
Yeah.
What we all find is that,
you've got a hillside that's on a slope.
Yeah.
Okay.
The slope isn't smooth.
Yes.
It's stepped.
Okay. Yeah.
And where it is stepped is where you've got a field boundary.
Yeah.
Okay.
If the field is ploughed.
Yeah.
Over many, many hundreds of years.
Soil gets washed down slope.
Yeah.
Okay. And it builds up behind these field boundaries which are stone, rubble and earth and banks.
Okay. Yeah.
This sort of, so the fields literally they have like a stepped profile.
Yeah.
As you go down.
And there have been archaeological excavations of these field boundaries, a dating of them.
And they go back around about 2000 years.
That's extraordinary.
It's absolutely extraordinary.
Isn't it? Oh my gosh.
I mean those fields in that West Penwith region are pretty unique.
Yeah. How have they survived all this time?
Almost certainly in continuous use.
Yeah. Yeah.
I mean it's, it is astonishing to think.
Wow.
Yeah.
So yeah, it's a very, very special landscape.
So do you identify it from ground level or do you need to be using a drone or flying over a landscape?
Well there's sort of two different approaches.
The specifics of those West Penwith field systems, that really, I mean it's obvious on the ground.
As you look around that landscape.
If you know what you're looking for.
Yeah. Yeah.
You've got these very distinctive sort of stepped profiles down.
Sorry.
Yeah.
That means that those fields have been ploughed for hundreds and hundreds of years.
The soil has gradually got washed down and accumulated behind these banks.
So you really need to be in the field.
Yeah.
Where you've got the Gwent levels.
The work I did there fundamentally is trying to understand the shapes of the fields.
Yeah. Yeah.
And you do that really from just from maps.
Yeah.
But to somebody who's not an archaeologist and you say understand the shapes of fields,
somebody might say, so what?
You know, what does the shape of field tell you?
Different morphologies of fields.
Yeah.
Are often created through different processes.
Okay.
So for example, different land uses.
So if you've got very long, narrow fields.
Yeah.
They're like little strips of land.
That is indicative of land that used to be in one enormous field.
Yeah.
It was divided up into strips.
As a way of distributing the land equally amongst all members of the community.
Is that strip grazing?
Is it really called strip grazing or is that something different?
Yeah. I don't know the phrase strip grazing.
Okay. I've heard it here in Herefordshire. So yeah, maybe I'm getting it wrong.
I think that might be something different.
Yeah.
It would either be used as arable land for grazing, for growing crops.
Or it could be used as meadow.
Okay. Yeah.
Yeah.
And what would happen each year is that all of those strips would be distributed to each
member of the community.
Okay.
So if you're quite a big land owner, you might get five strips.
Yeah.
If you were a relatively lowly peasant, you might only get one strip.
They're sometimes called dole moors.
Moor is simply the old English word for a wet boggy landscape.
Yeah.
But dole, we are of the generation that remembers the word dole.
As in D-O-L-E you mean?
Yeah.
As in the unemployment benefit.
Oh my goodness. Yeah.
And the reason is, the common root of it is to dole out is to distribute.
Okay. Yeah, yeah.
So the old almost slang phrase for the dole, being on the dole, comes from this root of
this word which means and for an organization to distribute something.
Ah, ah, okay.
So that's why they're known as dole moors.
They're wet boggy landscapes divided up into strips and they are distributed out to members
of the community.
Do you know, you said you arrived in, was it the early 90s to do your, so was it the
case that before then that it was an area that was overlooked as having this rich architectural,
archaeological potential?
Was it?
The, hang on, can I just quickly, hang on.
Um, what, there'd been a huge amount of work done on the prehistoric archeology.
Yeah.
Of the Severnestri wetlands.
So this is sort of pre-Roman evidence.
Yeah.
And a huge amount of work had been done on that.
What we knew far less of was what was going on in the Roman and the medieval periods.
And that's partly why my PhD supervisor started looking at this up in Gloucestershire.
Mm-hmm.
And then suggested that I looked at it for my PhD.
Yeah.
Um, in Somerset and in, in the, in the Gwent levels.
Okay.
I was quite lucky to be almost in the right place at the right time.
Yeah.
Um, it's, it's when there was increasing interest in, in wetlands and a realisation
how important wetlands were.
Yeah.
We knew about the remarkably well-preserved remains in the wetlands.
Mm.
Beneath the surface.
Yeah.
And nobody really looked at sort of the history of the modern, the modern, the present-day
landscape and how old that was.
Okay.
Yeah.
And so doing that was the sort of thing that I was interested in.
And I was just very fortunate that my PhD supervisor suggested that I looked at a landscape
that suddenly was going to become politically quite important, as it were, in terms of the
proposed route of this road.
Yeah.
So I was in the-
But what's the area though?
The Cowdercott and the Gwent Luke levels.
I mean it's huge, isn't it?
Huge area of study.
Um, well that's actually quite small compared to the Somerset levels.
Really?
Okay.
The Somerset levels are even bigger.
Yeah.
Is that because they're on the Windward side or is that because-
Is that because they're on the Windward side or we are the-
No, it's just the-
Actually, that is quite different.
The Gwent levels, you've got this area of former salt marsh-
Yeah.
That formed going out from the coast.
On the Somerset side of the estuary, what you've actually got are, if you like, a series
of former valleys that were flooded by rising sea level.
Yeah.
So, um, have you ever driven down the M5 from Bristol to say as far as Taunton?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay.
You might, now I explain to you, you'll go, ah yes.
Right, you're leaving, you've crossed the River Avon.
Yeah.
Okay, and you go along that slightly frightening bit where the M5 is terraced into the coast.
Yes, yes.
Yeah.
Then you go down a slope and you drive across what are known as the North Somerset levels.
Okay, I wasn't aware of that, but yes.
Flat bit.
Yeah.
Huge wetland.
Then you come to the Western Supermare Junction.
Yeah.
And then you go through another cutting.
Yes.
It's cut into rock.
Hmm.
You go out the other side, you then go across another flat bit.
Um, and then you go, when you get to near Bridgewater, you go into another sort of cutting.
Yeah.
And that's because the motorway is cutting through ridges of high ground between the
low-lying wetlands.
Okay, okay, yeah.
So it's very different to the Welsh side where you've just got this one big sort of like
coastal marshland.
Hmm.
In Somerset, you've got flat wetlands between ridges of high ground.
Yeah.
So would you say, so say, um, say the work of Martin Bell, for example, could I say that's
micro-archaeology and what yours is doing is macro?
Um, well, um, sort of.
Yes.
To be honest, I can see exactly where you're coming from.
Martin is an archaeologist who sees the landscape more than some of his prehistoric colleagues,
should we say.
But yes, Martin's research focuses on field work in specific places.
Yeah, yeah.
There was, I don't get obsessed with one particular place, I look at the landscape as a whole.
Yeah.
And you're getting the context of that area and how it all links and works with each other
and relates to each other.
Yeah.
So I suppose, yes, sort of traditional field archaeology, you could say is micro.
And a more landscape oriented approach is more sort of macro.
Yeah.
Um, I wouldn't say one is better or more important than the other.
They're different and they're therefore sort of complementary.
Yeah, they feed into each other, I would say.
You work together.
Yeah.
Um, I've got, I might jump around a bit, Steve.
How long have you got, by the way?
Um, probably, we're probably around for another half an hour or so.
Yeah, I'll, sorry, I get distracted easily.
Um, so, um, Professor John Allen's name has come up.
Did you know him?
Yes.
Well, do you remember when I said about my PhD supervisor pushing me in this direction?
He was a chap called Mike Falford.
Yeah.
So, um, he, and I did mention that there was a, he had a colleague.
That was John Allen.
Oh, really?
Okay, yeah.
So those were the two who were working on the Gloucestershire wetlands at the time.
Right, okay.
Um, so, um, John didn't, he wasn't one of my PhD supervisors, but I worked with John
on, on various things over the years.
Um, I mean, he was a remarkable man.
Um, once again, quite quiet and modest and so on.
He'd never stand in meetings spouting off like some people do.
Yeah.
You know, he was a lovely man, very quiet, but just so knowledgeable across so many fields.
Was he a geologist?
Yes, he, his background was as a geologist.
Um, he's, he once, he once explained to me how he wanted to spend about 10 years on a
particular research topic and then move on.
Yeah.
So he did a huge amount of work on, it was a particular geological period, and I can't
remember what it was.
It was, but tens of millions of years ago.
Yeah.
What some back sort of period.
Wow, yeah.
And he was like the world's expert on that.
Cool.
And then he decided, then I think he did something else.
I can't remember what that was.
He might have got into some type of fossil.
I can't remember.
But then he got interested in salt marshes.
Yeah.
So instead of something that was tens of millions of years old.
He was interested in salt marshes that are only a few hundred or a few thousand years
old.
Yeah.
And he started to study the salt marshes around the Severn Estuary as a way of studying sea
level change.
Okay, yeah.
Now he, the most amazing eye.
Yeah.
You'd be out in the field and you'd be talking to him, walking along and he'd go off on a
tangent because he'd seen something 20 meters away.
Wow, yeah.
So he started to find bits of pottery.
Yeah.
Salt marshes that he was studying.
Thought it looked old.
So of course he took it to the archaeology department at Reading.
Met Mike Falford.
Yeah.
Mike had a quick look at this pottery, said it was Roman.
And that's how their lifelong collaboration started.
How amazing.
So he only died recently, didn't he, I think?
Yeah.
So he was a member of this, is it Severn Estuary levels research committee that you're on?
Back in the early to mid 1980s, so we're going back a long way now, there was a proposal
to build a barrage across the Severn Estuary.
Have you heard of that?
Yeah, yeah.
Now that would have had huge implications for lots of things, including the archaeology.
Yeah.
So some of the archaeologists who were working in and around the estuary back in the 1980s
got together to establish what they call the Severn Estuary levels research committee.
Okay.
Now the Severn barrage proposal disappeared relatively quickly.
Yeah.
Because it basically would be so phenomenally expensive.
It didn't get going.
But I think it did, it stimulated this sort of group of archaeologists to stay together
with this, it's a relatively informal little sort of research group.
Yeah.
And so to say, I became a member of it when I started my PhD in 1989.
Okay.
When my recollection is that the threat of the barrage had largely passed, I think.
But I mean, John Allen was very, very active back then studying his salt marshes and he'd
got interested in sort of medieval reclamation and so on.
Yeah.
Martin had done some work at Breeing Down on the Somerset side of the estuary.
He, I think, was now getting interested on the Welsh side.
There was another remarkable figure in the history of the levels, was a chap called Derek
Upton.
Yes, yes, I was going to ask you about him.
Yeah.
He worked at the steelworks and he was a bird watcher.
And he's somebody else with the most amazing eye.
He started seeing strange things.
Yeah.
Seeing objects, seeing things in the intertidal area of the estuary.
I don't know who he first reported his finds to.
I'm not sure.
Yeah.
But once again, quite quickly, he got to know various archaeologists and people that he
could report his finds to.
Yeah.
And took him seriously as well, I suppose.
Sorry?
And also who took him seriously.
Absolutely.
I think that was the key thing.
Yeah.
So he was spotting little woven fish baskets and so on.
I think he might have discovered some of the first human footprints.
Yes.
Of course, Martin Bell has spent a lot of his time studying human footprints.
Yeah.
And so on.
So there was this sort of, it's just very fortuitous.
I think a lot of people sort of being around the estuary and then suddenly being drawn
in by this particular threat.
Yeah.
And then kind of sticking together once that threat had gone, simply because it's a remarkable
landscape to research.
And it's raised its profile, I suppose, as well.
Yeah.
So does it have any statutory protection?
It does for its nature conservation interests.
Yeah.
I mean, both sides of the estuary are relatively well protected in terms of habitat, ecology
related protection.
But unfortunately, there's not really anything big and powerful on the statutory front that
protects it from solar farms, et cetera.
Yeah.
So no, my feeling is that our special landscapes don't have enough legal protection.
And we're seeing this on the grant levels.
They're not going to be there in a few years' time.
Do you not think so?
Really?
Well, no.
I mean, they're building a solar farm at Whitsun.
Are they really?
I didn't know that.
Yeah, that's going ahead.
Why?
There's posals for a huge one on the Wentlewg level.
Yeah, yeah, I've heard that one.
Yeah.
And there's proposals for another one at Redwick.
And although solar farms don't permanently destroy a landscape, like housing development
or steelworks, for example, but they'll ruin the appearance.
No, there's no doubt about it.
Yeah.
And on the Gloucestershire side, once again, when you drive along the M4 from South Wales
to Bristol, you go over an equivalent wetland on the Bristol side of the estuary.
And it's just getting covered in massive industrial units.
I think there's a huge Amazon depot there, for example.
Oh, wow.
Well, I suppose it's happened in Whendlewg already, hasn't it?
You know, that has been subject to far more development than the Caldecott side.
Yeah.
But for you, I mean, has wetlands become your specialism, would you say?
Well, it was for, once again, probably sort of 10, 15 years or so.
Yeah.
I mean, I made a conscious decision to move on.
Yes.
Simply because as an academic, it's very easy to almost get typecast, to use an acting analogy.
Yeah, yeah.
So I absolutely consciously decided, right, I'm now going to start studying other things.
Yeah.
So I do quite a lot of work now.
Well, I had a period in my life, a bit like John Allen said, you should spend 10 years on something and then move on.
I had a period when I did a lot of work on regional variation in landscape character.
So why is the Devon landscape so different to Northamptonshire?
OK.
And so.
Yeah, yeah.
Then I got very interested in what happened when Britain ceased to be part of the Roman Empire
and whether that was actually a really significant change or not.
So I had quite a, I had about 10 years studying that.
So the Dark Ages, you mean?
Yeah, the start of what are traditionally called the Dark Ages.
I think a lot of us would suggest they weren't quite as dark as they used to be.
But yeah, what is traditionally seen as being the sort of almost like the end of civilisation in the Roman period.
But actually, I think my work hopefully shows that if you were just like a peasant farmer ploughing a few fields and tending a few sheep, not a lot actually changed.
So I spent a few years sort of studying that.
So I sort of I tried to move on from wetlands, not because I didn't enjoy studying them, but just because, you know, a typical academic career is about 40 years.
And I don't think many academics want to spend 40 years studying exactly the same thing.
A change is always good, isn't it, I think?
Yeah, but one of the reasons why I've so enjoyed my involvement in the Living Levels project is that it has brought me back to a landscape that I studied so intensively for two years.
For two years, that was my whole life.
Yeah, yeah.
And I've done I do periodically return to some of these wetland landscapes just to do a little bit of work on something that I'm interested in.
Yeah.
I asked before actually about how much if your work is reliant on aerial views.
Do you have to rely? Is that part of it for you?
A bit.
The bread and butter is looking at maps because they are available in such detail.
So what age do you go back to?
Well, there's good map coverage for the whole country from the 19th century.
Yeah.
So sort of middle of the 19th century, there's really detailed maps of pretty much the whole country.
Yeah, yeah.
But some areas there are some earlier maps as well.
OK, yeah.
The maps are earlier than aerial photographs.
And also aerial photographs, the earliest aerial photographs really from the 1940s.
OK, yeah.
But they're pretty fuzzy.
Yeah, yeah.
But there are there are places where, for example, earthworks, sort of humps and bumps,
they are they show up on aerial photographs from, say, the late 1940s.
But those earthworks now have been completely ploughed flat.
Yeah.
So so yeah, I think to understand the landscape, you've really got to look at absolutely everything you've got at your disposal.
Although I would say it's the maps that are the starting point.
Yeah.
I mean, maps tell a story all on their own, don't they?
I mean, I love a map.
Do you use the oh, gosh, my name's gone, the the internal drainage board maps.
How far back do they go?
Yeah.
I mean, the the earliest of the maps that show individual fields and buildings and so on are 1830 to 1831.
And those were the earliest maps that cover the whole of the grant levels.
And they are an absolutely remarkable source.
Are they?
So I mean, they were really the starting point of the mapping in my grant levels, historic landscape study.
Really?
Has there been a high point for you or, you know, punching the air moment for you in all your work down there?
On the levels?
Yeah.
I don't know, really.
Off the top of my head, I don't think I can.
I mean, I've had various very memorable moments.
Yeah.
But I don't think there is quite one punching the air.
I mean, I do remember doing a survey of the intertidal area at Magor Pill.
Yeah.
With John Allen in February.
Oh, God.
And it was bitterly cold.
And that absolutely tested my commitment to archaeology.
Cold and wet.
Yeah, it was that was awful from the conditions, but it was just fascinating.
You know, spending a week with the great man.
Yeah.
So interpreting all of this archaeology.
So I mean, that was that was a definite sort of highlight.
But yes, I haven't really got the air punching moment.
I should probably think of something when we sign off.
Yeah.
What about, I'm not sure this is a silly question or not, but the work you do,
is it something that can be used by?
Let me think I don't ask this question as a way of informing the future.
Because that is what the great levels historic landscape study.
I mean, that was all about.
And it did it fade through to another Caddo Countryside Council for Wales
initiative, which was to produce a register of historic landscapes in Wales.
Yeah.
And it identified 60 ish landscapes of particular historic importance in Wales,
one of which is the Gwent levels.
And so the Gwent levels was the first one of the landscapes in the register to see
this sort of really intensive study.
So yeah, I think that study really did sort of have an impact in terms of raising
the profile of the concept of how important still used landscapes are and the
time depth that they have.
And there was similar work that was done in England as well.
And it was a very exciting period to be sort of working in what at that time was a
really new and a really sort of innovative concept.
The archaeologists shouldn't just be grubbing about in the dirt, but archaeologists
should be appreciating the historic importance of the landscape all around us.
I think it's something that we take for granted now.
But thinking back to that sort of early mid 1990s, very few archaeologists had any
interest at all in the historic age of fields that they walk through or roads that
they drive down.
They were just roads and fields.
They are actually often as old, if not older, than things that archaeologists grub
around in the dirt.
It's so interesting.
Because like you said earlier, it's so relatable, isn't it?
It's so relatable.
What about have you had to, so you said you've used maps and old documents, Doomsday
Book.
Have you ever used spoken to locals and asked for their folk memory maybe?
Well, this is something that I wish I'd done more of in the Great Neville's Historic
Landscape Study.
I did talk to Neville Walters.
Oh, wow.
He's brilliant.
Have you spoken to him?
I've got one of my best interviews.
There was a lady who worked for the Countryside Council for Wales.
I think her name was Susan Howard, who was my first point of contact at the Countryside
Council for Wales, just as Rick Turner was my first point of contact in Caddick.
She introduced me to various sort of local people.
But Neville was the one who I remember I spent quite a bit of time with.
I spent about half a day with him.
He drove me around various places.
We talked about some of the traditional methods of managing that landscape that he could remember.
I remember he told me he was paid something like sixpence for digging a certain length
of gripe, these spade dug gullies in the surface of the fields.
It was something like sixpence for 30 feet a day or something like that.
That is in that book somewhere.
I did write that down.
What was really nice was we had a big Living Levels event at the, is it called the Lyset Institute?
Yes, yes.
I was sitting at one of the tables and this elderly gentleman sort of walked past and
sort of looked at me in that sort of knowing way.
I didn't recognise him because this was about 23, 25 years ago.
He obviously recognised me.
Whether he'd asked somebody, is that Stephen Rippon, I don't know.
He obviously recognised me and I recognised that he clearly knew me.
I guessed it might have been him.
I went out and we had a nice little chat.
I wish I'd done more of that.
The people I did talk to, it was very useful.
I found out about the cycle of cleaning out the ditches.
It's only the major water courses that you would have cleaned out every year.
Then you'd have this cycle of cleaning the minor reams perhaps every three years.
The field boundaries, a farmer might just clean out two field boundaries a year.
They might have something like almost a 30-year cycle, some of them.
Of course, that's how you get the difference in vegetation in these ditches because you get these different times.
Neville told me all about that.
It's a particular feature that is of particular interest to you?
I've always had a soft spot for Whitsun.
Right from the start of my work, it was obviously a very odd block of the landscape.
I went so far in unraveling its history and so on.
Of course, that is in the book.
I do speculate in the book that it might have been associated with Flemish immigrants.
Why? Really? Why?
We know that Flemings were brought to Pembrokeshire in the 12th century
As part of the English conquest of Wales, they would use colonists to settle land.
There were a lot of Flemish mercenaries at that time too, weren't there?
Yes. It's well documented in Pembrokeshire.
That's interesting.
I recognise that the morphology of Whitsun is very similar to villages in the low countries.
Yes.
That's as far as I got in the Gwent levels historic landscape study.
How interesting.
I gave a lecture at the University of Ghent probably about six years ago now.
Yes.
One of their brighter master students came up to me afterwards and said he was interested in...
I had a slide about Whitsun and wondered if it was Flemish.
Yes.
This student, Gerven, went on to do it as his PhD.
Wow, really?
He has found morphological similarities.
Yes.
There's a local historian that Mark Lewis knows about who has found some links in the documents with a Flemish family who held Whitsun.
How curious.
It's one of the exciting things about being an academic.
Yes.
You do have to brace yourself for the fact that sometimes what you say is proved right, sometimes it's proved wrong.
It's so nice when it's proved right though, isn't it?
Yes.
But I think those early speculations probably have been proved right through Gerven's PhD and also the research of this historian.
I was thinking, Steve, I won't take much longer, looking at the Wendt Lug levels, which has been massively developed, how do you do your work there?
Are you able to do anything there?
The interest in the Wendt Lug level, and this goes back to John Allen again, he found a lot of Roman material.
Off of what's called Rumney Great Wharf.
It's a cardiff end.
The Wendt Lug level has got this very strange landscape of lots of long, narrow fields, blocks sort of next to each other.
It looks like it could be Roman in date.
It's just gradually getting covered in development.
It's a great loss.
One of the things that I have learned is that you do, however, have to pull back.
If you got terribly upset by every development in every landscape that you'd ever studied, you'd just be a manic depressive.
You're right.
You have to detach yourself, don't you?
You do, but when I go back to the Wendt levels, I do get a great pang of affection.
But it is very sad to see that some areas, some bits of it are getting developed.
I think if there had been a positive from the M4 diversion, it might have drawn a line on the map that the planners could have said, no more.
I'm not developing south of that line.
I had this discussion with various people about the pros and cons of that motorway.
It would have taken some land from the levels.
I just wondered whether it might have drawn a line and no development would have been permitted south of it.
I don't know.
Because the problem with the Wendt Lughe level really is it's the development spilling in from the Cardiff area.
There's just nothing to stop it.
I fear for Wendt Lughe.
I think it will go the way of the Avon levels near Bristol, which they're just getting covered in development as well.
There's not very little space there now, is there?
Yeah, there doesn't seem to be much space there anyway.
Can I just ask you quickly about the drainage?
So you would be looking at that evidence of that as well in your landscape?
Yeah.
So to me, it seemed terribly complicated.
So how have you managed to work that out?
Is that by referring to the drainage maps?
A lot of it was actually quite obvious just by walking around the landscape talking to Susan Howard all those years ago.
The way that the drainage system works hasn't fundamentally changed for a thousand years.
It's gravity led.
Yeah.
There's not the pumping that you get, for example, on the Somerset levels and have had on the Somerset levels for many hundreds of years.
So it's just a gravity fed system where you know the Monks did.
Yes.
You see that?
That is one of the channels that is designed to take streams flowing off of the uplands across the levels without flooding them.
That deals with that problem.
Yeah.
Then you've got to deal with all the wet stuff falling out of the sky, the rain.
And that's why you have the gripes.
Yeah.
They take their water into the field boundary ditches, the field boundary ditches drain into the reams.
And reams then discharge their waters under the seawall through those tidal sluices.
So it's a very simple system.
Yeah.
It's wonderfully simple.
But it's sophisticated because the land is lower away from the seawall, isn't it?
So it's effectively going up, isn't it?
Well, no, you just have to dig the ditches deeper and deeper as you go towards the coast.
Right.
Yes.
Yeah.
That's the thing.
See, the other feature, which means that it works, is because of the huge tidal range of the seven estuary.
Yeah.
So what basically happens is that when the tide is high, the flap on those tidal gates is foreshut.
So all the water is held in the drainage ditches in the levels.
But then you get this long period when the tide goes down, the tidal gates can open and you then get this very long period when all the water can flow out.
Yeah.
So if you had a much smaller tidal range, those tidal flaps could end up being closed for much longer.
Right.
OK.
Yeah.
They were actually really closed for a relatively short period of the day.
So that's also why this gravity fed system can work, because enough of the water can get out.
Yeah.
Quite quickly.
Do you know the movements of the seven, you know, it's ebbing and flowing and all that.
Is that something that's of interest to landscape archaeologists like you?
It's a natural phenomenon.
Yeah.
Of course, it's instrumental to the wetlands having been created.
But you do get wetland landscapes like that, for example, around the Thames Estuary that has a much, much smaller tidal range.
Yeah.
Much, much smaller.
So it's interesting.
But.
Just in the background, really.
In the background.
Yeah.
Steve, I've kept you far too long.
I'm really sorry.
It's been so interesting.
I'm going to type this up and I'll send it to you so you can look through and cross things out or correct me.
And if I wanted to ask any extra questions, I'll put it on that if that's OK with you.
Yeah, that's fine.
Is that all right?
Yeah.
Yeah, I'm sure there's something I've forgotten to ask.
A glaring gap.
But thank you so much.
It's so interesting.
That's great.
Yeah.
Okey dokey.
Thank you so much.
You take care.
Nice to chat to you.
OK.
Bye bye.
Thanks Steve.
Bye.